Updated Protocol Designer section in Flex manual (#18893)
OpenTrons/opentrons-api: docs/flex-manual/docs/protocol-development.md

| **Time estimate**        | Approximately how long the protocol takes to run.                                                                                                       |
| **Description**          | A short summary of what the protocol does.                                                                                                              |
| **Robot model**          | Which Opentrons robots the protocol is compatible with.                                                                                                 |

> | **Protocol editability** | JSON and Python protocols are editable in Protocol Designer, with no coding required. Python protocols are editable in any text editor, using the Python Protocol API. |

Reviewer: Only Python protocols generated by PD can be edited in PD. So we need a little more detail here.
```suggestion
| **Protocol editability** | All JSON protocols are editable in Protocol Designer, with no coding required. Python protocols that were created with Protocol Designer are also editable in it. All Python protocols are editable in any text editor, using the Python Protocol API. |
```
This could be bullets but that would kinda blow up the table formatting. I'm OK with this as a short paragraph.

- Pause to let you verify progress or access samples.

> This section covers using Protocol Designer to create and edit a Flex protocol. For more details, see our Protocol Designer [instruction manual](https://insights.opentrons.com/hubfs/Protocol%20Designer%20Instruction%20Manual.pdf?_gl=1*ui6se*_ga*MTYxODA1OTk3LjE3MzgxODAyNjI.*_ga_66HK7MC5D7*MTc0MzUyMjc5NS4xMDQuMS4xNzQzNTIyODEwLjQ1LjAuMA..*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NDAwMDA1NDYuQ2p3S0NBaUFuOWE5QmhCdEVpd0FiS2c2ZmlTMDk1QzdSekg3ZmVUUW0waUJ5LVpLckptZlQ2Y2ZpNFpGZVNQMmZvUElETWxrUzZfNjZCb0N2bHdRQXZEX0J3RQ..*_gcl_au*MjEyNDk3NTAzMi4xNzM5OTE4MjIy*_ga_GNSMNLW4RY*MTc0MzUyMjc5NS4xMDUuMS4xNzQzNTIyODEwLjQ1LjAuOTExNjgzNjA0 "instruction manual").
> 
> [//]: # (temporary link, until we have an online/mkdocs PD manual)

Reviewer: At least get rid of the tracking parameter.
```suggestion
This section covers using Protocol Designer to create and edit a Flex protocol. For more details, see our Protocol Designer [instruction manual](https://insights.opentrons.com/hubfs/Protocol%20Designer%20Instruction%20Manual.pdf).

[//]: # (temporary link, until we have an online/mkdocs PD manual)
```

I can update the link when I refactor the Flex manual.

All work in Protocol Designer takes place within your web browser. When
you're done creating or editing your protocol, you'll need to export it to
a Python file. Then upload that file to a robot and run it, as you would
with any protocol.

> 

Reviewer: Might be worthwhile adding a note here:
```suggestion
!!! note
    Earlier versions of Protocol Designer (through July 2025) exported protocols as JSON files. You can still run these protocols on Flex. If you modify a JSON protocol in Protocol Designer, it will be exported as a Python protocol.
```

### Protocol Designer requirements

Protocol Designer is only supported for use in Google Chrome

> and requires an internet connection. Newer versions of Protocol Designer require newer versions of the Opentrons App. 

Reviewer: This feels vague, but let's leave it for now. I think it would be good to have a table of dates and required software versions in the full PD manual. If/when we add that, we can crossreference it here.

Author: ticketing in the backlog.

### Designing a protocol

Protocols are all about informing the robot what hardware it will use to
take specific actions. This process is broken down into four steps in
Protocol Designer:

| Step | Description |
| -------- | --------------- |
| Protocol setup | Specify your robot, pipettes, modules, and other hardware (like the Flex Gripper). |
| Protocol overview | View protocol details like instruments, liquids, and the protocol starting deck at a glance. |
| Edit protocol | Edit the starting deck, define liquids, and create protocol steps. |

> | Export protocol | Save and import your protocol into the Opentrons App to run on the Flex. |

Reviewer: "Save and import" so close together makes it sound like that all happens in PD.
```suggestion
| Export protocol | Save your protocol file, which is ready to import into the Opentrons App and run on the Flex. |
```

### Part 1: Create a protocol

> When you launch Protocol Designer, click to **Create a protocol**. Start by selecting pipettes and, if needed, a Flex Gripper to use with the Flex. You can also customize modules and fixtures, like the waste chute, trash bin, and staging areas, to optimize deck space. Only modules and fixtures compatible with Flex are available. 

Reviewer: felt redundant
```suggestion
When you launch Protocol Designer, click to **Create a protocol**. Start by selecting pipettes and, if needed, a Flex Gripper. You can also customize modules and fixtures, like the waste chute, trash bin, and staging areas, to optimize deck space. Only modules and fixtures compatible with Flex are available. 
```

Protocol Designer protocols can control multiple Flex modules of the same type, except for the Thermocycler. At any time, you can edit the protocol to change your hardware configuration. 

After naming your protocol, review the details in the protocol overview. Protocol Designer shows metadata, like the title and authors, instruments, liquids, and protocol steps. Click **Edit** in the upper right of each section to make changes. You can hover over the protocol starting deck on the right to view current deck slot details. 

<figure class="screenshot" markdown>

>   ![Protocol overview](images/protocol_overview.png)
>   <figcaption>The protocol overview includes metadata, instruments and deck hardware, and the protocol starting deck. Liquids and protocol steps not shown.</figcaption>
> </figure>
> 
> [//]: # (specify lightbox on this page or per image)

Reviewer: Let's add the class for `glightbox` here. You can do the frontmatter and YML stuff in this PR or a followup.
```suggestion
  ![Protocol overview](images/protocol_overview.png){ .on-glb }
  <figcaption>The protocol overview includes metadata, instruments and deck hardware, and the protocol starting deck. Liquids and protocol steps not shown.</figcaption>
</figure>
```

### Part 2: Edit a protocol

> Click **Edit protocol** to add labware, liquids, and additional hardware to your protocol. The protocol starting deck view shows everything on the deck down to individual wells -- even on 384-well plates. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Edit protocol** to add labware, liquids, and additional hardware to your protocol. The protocol starting deck view shows everything on the deck down to individual wells, even on 384-well plates. 
```

    * **Tip position**: where the Flex aspirates or dispenses in your labware. 
    * Additional advanced settings like pre-wet, touch tip, mix, delay, blowout, and air gap. 

* **Mix steps** mix liquid by repeatedly aspirating or dispensing. Mixing occurs in each well you select, one after the other, without moving any liquid between wells. 

    Choose how much liquid to mix with, the number of mixing repetitions, which wells will be mixed, and tip management settings for your workflow. You can also choose to apply Opentrons-verified liquid class settings to the mix. 

* **Move steps** let you control the Flex Gripper or move labware around the deck manually. By default, move steps use a gripper if added in your protocol. You need to use the gripper to dispose of labware when moving it into the waste chute, or when moving the lid off the Absorbance Plate Reader Module. 

    You need to manually move labware off-deck. During a manual move step, the protocol pauses. Confirm your labware move to resume the protocol.

* **Module steps** let you control Flex modules during a protocol. Protocol Designer includes different customizable options for each module. 

>   * **Absorbance Plate Reader**: Protocol Designer lets you create multiple steps to initialize the plate reader, read samples in a plate, or move the lid on and off the module. An option to **Read labware** is only available when a plate is inside the plate reader. After reading a plate, you can find a CSV file with absorbance measurement data in the Flex's recent protocol runs in the Opentrons App. 

Reviewer: Looks like you intended to indent these but it's not rendering that way. Try four-space indents.

Author: indented this and the module steps below; tested with `mkdocs serve`.

!!! note

>     You'll need a Flex Gripper to add an Absorbance Plate Reader Module to your protocol starting deck. To prevent damage, only a Flex Gripper can move the lid on and off the Plate Reader.  

Reviewer: And indent this whole note _another_ four spaces to have it be inside the plate reader bullet.

Author: indented this and the module steps below; tested with `mkdocs serve`.

#### Edit steps

Double click any step to make changes, or click and drag to reorder an individual step in the timeline. Changing the step order can cause protocol errors, so Protocol Designer will ask you to confirm your change each time.

Protocol Designer can help you save time and stay organized when your protocol uses multiple steps of the same type: 

- Double click any step and choose **Rename** to add a custom name and description.
- Select multiple transfer steps at once to batch edit transfer settings like: 
    - Aspirate and dispense flow rate
    - Well order and tip position
    - Pre-wet tip, delay, or blowout
    - Mix before aspirating or dispensing
- To quickly add multiple of the same step, click any step once. Then, click the three-dot menu in the step and choose **Duplicate step**. 

#### Warnings and errors

To prevent errors, Protocol Designer displays hints, warnings, and error descriptions as you create and edit a protocol. Deleting a module or labware used in your protocol, running out of tips in a transfer step, or leaving a labware latch closed can all result in a Protocol Designer errors. 

> Click on any step that appears in red in the protocol timeline and follow the text instructions to fix errors. We recommend resolving all warnings and errors to avoid problems in your workflow. For more details, see the Protocol Designer [instruction manual](https://insights.opentrons.com/hubfs/Protocol%20Designer%20Instruction%20Manual.pdf?_gl=1*ui6se*_ga*MTYxODA1OTk3LjE3MzgxODAyNjI.*_ga_66HK7MC5D7*MTc0MzUyMjc5NS4xMDQuMS4xNzQzNTIyODEwLjQ1LjAuMA..*_gcl_aw*R0NMLjE3NDAwMDA1NDYuQ2p3S0NBaUFuOWE5QmhCdEVpd0FiS2c2ZmlTMDk1QzdSekg3ZmVUUW0waUJ5LVpLckptZlQ2Y2ZpNFpGZVNQMmZvUElETWxrUzZfNjZCb0N2bHdRQXZEX0J3RQ..*_gcl_au*MjEyNDk3NTAzMi4xNzM5OTE4MjIy*_ga_GNSMNLW4RY*MTc0MzUyMjc5NS4xMDUuMS4xNzQzNTIyODEwLjQ1LjAuOTExNjgzNjA0 "instruction manual").

Reviewer: Same as above, zap the parameter.
```suggestion
Click on any step that appears in red in the protocol timeline and follow the text instructions to fix errors. We recommend resolving all warnings and errors to avoid problems in your workflow. For more details, see the Protocol Designer [instruction manual](https://insights.opentrons.com/hubfs/Protocol%20Designer%20Instruction%20Manual.pdf).
```

[//]: # (temporary link, until we have an online/mkdocs PD manual)

### Part 3: Export a protocol

When you're finished creating and editing your protocol, click **Done** in the upper right to return to the protocol overview. Click **Export protocol** to download your protocol file. 

> To run your protocol, import it into the Opentrons App (see the Software and Operation chapter for details on installing and using the Opentrons App). Then, run your protocol from the app or send it to your Flex to run from the touchscreen. 
> 
> [//]: # (insert internal link in above paragraph)

Reviewer: How about this, with one link to the most salient part?
```suggestion
To run your protocol, first import it into the Opentrons App. Then, run your protocol from the app or [send it to your Flex][transferring-protocols-to-flex] to run from the touchscreen.
```
